

**Memoization** is an optimization technique used primarily to speed up computer programs by storing the results *(into cache)* of expensive function calls *(Program which consumes large amounts of space and time)* and returning the cached result when the same input occurs again.

  

In this article, I am going to highlight the use of memoization in the JavaScript context. As you must know, JavaScript is a [multi paradigm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Programming_paradigm) language, supporting event-driven, functional, and imperative programming styles. Memoization is heavily used by the compilers in functional programming languages unlike imperative programming languages (C, C++, Java) which heavily rely on side effects.

  

A memoized function should be a pure function. A pure function is a function that returns values identical for identical arguments.  Pure functional applications should not have any side effects. A function is said to have side effects if it modifies some state variables values outside its local environment. Examples of side effects include: modifying a non-local variable, modifying a static local variable, modifying a mutable argument [passed by a reference](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Value_type_and_reference_type), performing I/O, or calling other functions with side effects.

  

Now let's jump to the code part on how to use the memoization technique using React JS. 

  

**In React (v16 onwards)**

There is a hook called [useMemo](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-reference.html#usememo), which returns a memoized value.

```

const memoizedValue = useMemo(() => computeExpensiveValue(a, b), [a, b]);

```
Points to remember - 

- On every render, the function passed through useMemo() runs.

- No side effects are allowed in the function passed through useMemo().

- If No value is passed in the dependencies, a new value will be computed on every render.

- If dependencies have been added to the array, useMemo will be called on each render and also when any of the dependent values have changed.

  

**Important*!*

  

To free memory for offscreen components, React will free up some memory. Hence React will forget some previously memoized values and recalculate them on the next render or changes in the dependency array. So it's recommended to write your code that still works without useMemo(), and then use useMemo() to optimize your performance.

  

useMemo(), doesn't guarantee memoization continually. Next, we'll see how to implement memoization using Pure JavaScript.

  

**Using Pure JavaScript or VanillaJS**

    let sum = 0;
    const calc = (n) => {
        for(let i = 0; i <= n; i++){
            sum += i; 
        }
        return sum; 
    }
    console.time();
    console.log(calc(100));
    cosnole.timeEnd();
The above code will output the time taken by this snippet to execute. Next time when we call the function calc() with the same input 100, the function should not compute again rather it will take the returned value from the cache. Let's achieve this using closure and a higher-order function. 

    let sum = 0;
    const calc = (n) => {
        for(let i = 0; i <= n; i++){
            sum += i; 
        }
        return sum; 
    }
    
    const memoize = (fun) => {
        let cache = {};
        return function(...arg){
            let n = arg[0];
            if(n in cache){
                console.log("Calculating for 2nd,3rd... time");
                return cache[n];
            }else{
                console.log("Calculating for 1st time");
                let result = fun(n);
                cache[n] = result; 
                return result;
            }
        }
    }
    
    const memoizedFun = memoize(calc);
    
    console.time();
    console.log(memoizedFun(100000)); // 1st time, it computes
    console.timeEnd();
    console.time();
    console.log(memoizedFun(100000)); // 2nd time, it uses directly from cache
    console.timeEnd();

Now, Let's understand what is Lexical scoping, closure, and HOF, 

**Lexical Scoping** defines how variables are resolved in nested functions. Inner functions contain the scope of parent functions, even after the parent function is returned. Let us understand this with the example, 

    function Person() {
        let name = "Mahatma Gandhi";
        function Meet() {
            console.log(`Hello ${name}`);
        }
        return Meet;
    }
    
    let sayHello = Person();
    sayHello();
   
In the above example, when Person() execution is completed, the name variable is no longer accessible. When we execute, sayHello() again which is the reference to Meet(), the name variable still exists in this scope. Here this inner function is called **Closure** which retains the variables of the outer scope and the outer function is called **Higher Order Function**. A Higher Order Function is a function that either takes one or more functions as arguments or returns a function as its result. 
