**Choosing between Native or Hybrid Apps in 2022**

I have to decide, which one of the two approachs can be economical, scalable and highly customisable enough in the long run when the application scales. Shall I trust the hybrid hype or follow the native route? 

I got 3 options, 

 1. I can consider a hybrid framework such as Quasar or Ionic, because JavaScript, HTML, CSS  code base can run in mupliple platforms such as SPA, SSR, PWA, Mobile app, Desktop app & Browser Extension etc.
 2. Or, I can choose a semi-hybrid-native framework such as React Native that supports Android, Android TV, iOS, macOS, tvOS, Web, Windows, UWP, and VR.
 3. Or, I can choose a native SDK for each platform. 

Hybrid frameworks are quick to deliver the product, but in the long run the performance can be impaired due to complete web variant. The reason [why](https://mashable.com/archive/html5-biggest-mistake) facebook came up with the idea React native.

React native converts the JavaScript code to the native code. In the other hand, a hybrid framework renders your JavaScript code to a web compiler such as WebView in Android. 

Some points to note:
 - Mobile web apps are slow. [Ref](https://sealedabstract.com/rants/why-mobile-web-apps-are-slow/). Even PWAs are slower than the native apps.
 - Performance wise, native apps are way better than hybrid apps.
 -  Hyrbrid apps are cost effective, time effective, fast updates directly from servers, smaller in size. But the app can't be in par with the native apps in look and feel.  App will not work offline, when server is down your app will not render. 
 - You can't create widgets using hybrid apps.
 - Hybrid apps are good choice for static or simple pages. Not a good choice for high computation apps. 

In the end, 
React native can provide both native and hybrid development ecosystem. A webview to render your webpage, native components. While Quasar or Ionic is completly hybrid and missing the native components. 
Though I prefere native development, but I can't afford a Macbook, then I must prefer React Native for iOS development. Then deployment will be taken care by cloud platforms or a friend's device. 
